I am Brian Tarrant. I'm the editor of a website called Real World Data Science. And my talk
today is to tell you about how we built real world data science. This is a screenshot of
it here, how we built that using Quarto. And I guess some of my journey of discovery and
learning as I moved from being a journalist who knew pretty much nothing about any of
these tools to somebody who built a website, which I'm quite proud of. And I hope you'll
go and explore it. So I'm a journalist. That means I think a lot about words and the impact
that they can have on people and how a few words, you know, strung together in a short
phrase can, you know, have a real impact on your life, make you think differently about
the world, change your perspective, whatever it might be. For example, will you marry me?
Right? Someone says that to you, you're going to feel pretty good about yourself for a while,
right? A few years later, maybe things aren't going so well. When you hear those words,
I want a divorce. I know, you know, that will knock you for six, right? Well, I had a kind
of experience like that that knocked me back a little bit recently when in March 2022,
my boss came to me and said, build us a website. Now, that isn't quite as dramatic as will
you marry me or I want a divorce, but it kind of knocked me back a little bit because the
background to this was I had applied for a job to build a new online publication for
my employer. I'd worked as a print journalist most of my career, but I'd worked on websites,
I'd done some design projects. I'd never built a website from the ground up, but I'd been
involved in things and, you know, I was feeling cocky. I knew a bit of HTML. I thought I'd
be fine. How difficult can it be to build a website? And then I started to think about
all the steps that I would need to go through in order to build the website. And I felt
like I maybe had bitten off more than I could chew. But that all changed when I started
speaking to some data scientists and someone said to me, do you know quarto? This four
word phrase, and it really changed my perspective on what's possible to do with digital publications
now. So I'll back up a little bit and tell you a bit about the context of where I was
coming from. So the challenge, I worked for the Royal Statistical Society. We're a membership
organisation for statisticians. We've been going for about 200 years. And our president
at the time felt that we needed to do more to support statisticians that are working
as data scientists and also to contribute more to the data science conversation. Statisticians
have a role to play in that and we didn't feel like we were doing as much as we could
do. So we wanted to create a new publication for data science professionals, something
that would focus on real world examples of data science practice and that would generally
kind of support knowledge sharing within the community. When I came into the project, I
was thinking I wanted to make sure that the website that we built would be a suitable
home for data scientists to contribute to because in my previous role, I was editing
a magazine, a statistics magazine called Significance. And I spent about eight years really annoying
contributors because they would present these lovingly crafted late tech articles and they'd
send them to me and I'd say, excellent, thank you very much, could you redo that in Word?
And often that was followed by a deep sigh. So I thought, right, if we're going to do
this, we're going to build something new. We want to build something that uses tools
that data scientists use and that, you know, it's kind of speaking your language, essentially.
So I started phoning around, speaking to people I know, and that's when I heard that phrase,
do you know quarto? And the first time I heard it, I just jotted it down in my notebook.
I think I misspelt it, but it was the second time that this came up. Another person I was
speaking to, somebody else said, do you know quarto? And I thought, I probably should look
into this. So I went across to the website. This is what it looks like sort of now. It
was broadly the same back when I started looking at it. And this really intrigued me straight
away because, you know, even with my sort of very rudimentary knowledge, I knew that
on the left was like the core, the raw underlying code, if you like, and that was generating
the outputs on the right. I liked the outputs on the right. I thought they looked nice and
clean and crisp, and they had a kind of just a simplicity that I would like in a kind of
online publication. I also liked the fact that the, I could see that the figures were
being generated from the code. I'd spent a lot of time, again, annoying contributors
to Significance Magazine by telling them that they hadn't output in the right resolution
or the right size or whatever it might be. So this could kind of deal with all those
sorts of problems. So I thought, great, I'm going to learn quarto and also borrow that
guy's shirt. So I couldn't copy the hairstyle, unfortunately. So step one, went to the quarto
website. Easy, right? Download. I've downloaded lots of things in the past on my PC. Not a
problem. This is where things started to get difficult for me. I know what a text editor
is. I have, I recognized RStudio and Jupyter. I think I once accessed a Jupyter notebook
and accidentally collapsed all the text chunks and code cells, and I didn't know what I was
doing and got out of there pretty quick. So clearly I needed to learn more than just
quarto. I needed to learn a tool as well. I picked Visual Studio Code because it was
first on the list. So two things now, learn quarto, learn Visual Studio Code. Okay, fine.
Well, anyway, fortunately, quarto has made this easy because there's a whole load of
tutorials on the site, obviously starting with helping me to get familiar with working
with a quarto document and then transitioning over to looking at how to build a website.
So I think maybe it took me several days to a week, and I built my first website. A little
demo. It's not the world's best website, but it was my first website, and I felt proud
of it. You could see that, you know, I'd started to play around with how we might position,
you know, different sort of content blocks and things like that. But there was more work
that needed to be done, not least the fact that this was on my local machine, and a website's
only really good if it's actually on the internet so everybody can see it. So I went back to
the quarto guide, and then I found this thing about GitHub Pages, right? So I'd been using
GitHub mostly as a file, like a kind of personal file storage. I didn't really understand it,
but I was familiar with the word, so I figured GitHub Pages would be the way to go for this.
GitHub Action, this sounded exciting. Automatically render your files. Didn't want to have to
be doing that manually every time, so I thought I would try this. But I quickly realized looking
at a few GitHub Actions that I had no idea what I was doing, and I had no idea how these
things worked. So now I was learning Quarto, learning Visual Studio Code, and GitHub as
well. I have made a huge mistake. I really thought that that was it. But I then discovered
the section on the Quarto website, which was the gallery, and then this little subsection
here about websites. These three websites in particular, the NASA and OpenScape sites,
Amine's data science in a box, and along with the Quarto website, these were really helpful
to me because as well as looking at the websites, I could go onto their GitHub repos and look
at how the sites were built. I could interrogate the actions and see broadly how these things
were working and try and figure it out slowly in my head. I mean, the actions I'd built
failed multiple times, but eventually I got somewhere. I got somewhere with it.
And as I was digging around in these repos, I realized something that I guess I didn't know
about GitHub before, which is that it's not just a personal storage for files. It's a platform
for collaboration and co-creation. I don't have a software or engineering background or anything
like that, so I never would have had to use it for that reason. But the fact that I could see
in each of these repos people working together, collaborating on projects, sharing ideas,
solving problems, this really changed my whole perspective about how we could build our website.
So I was thinking about it in a kind of old media sense before, which is we'll build a website,
people will come to us and submit articles, and we'll publish them. But I actually thought,
well, maybe we could actually create this website together as a community, that it isn't just
something that we build and maintain. It's something that everybody can feel involved
in and can contribute to. I wanted to make sure that if you wanted to share your expertise,
but your expertise or your passion wasn't necessarily writing articles about data science
projects you work on, maybe you could contribute to the maintenance of the site. Maybe you've
seen a really cool thing in Quarto that you think we should add to our site, and you could help us
do that. Maybe there's something we could, an extension or whatever, that we could build and
share with the wider community. And when I went back to my priorities or the challenge that
was set for me, I realized that this idea here about creating a support community around
what we wanted to build was already in there. It took this process for me to,
I guess, for it to be highlighted to me and to draw it out. So if you go to the site now,
you'll see that we are up and running. We have people who are contributing to the front end.
They're sharing case studies. They are putting together tutorials and explainers about data
science tools and methods. They're sharing the stories of their careers and how they got into
data science, what they've learned, and giving advice to people who are looking to follow in
their footsteps. And we've also created a space for people to talk about the perspectives and
big themes and challenges in data science. But the other thing that started to happen,
and this has happened organically, is that people have started to think about,
as I was saying, supporting the website beyond just creating content for it. So
about a month ago now, a data science student in the Netherlands, Finn Ole Hoene, got in touch
with us and said, you know, I'd like to build a template for real-world data science so that if
people want to write for you, there's a kind of example quarto document in there which shows all
the different code features that you can use with the article. And when they render it, it will look
like it will look on your website. And I think that's really important. If you're thinking about
contributing to a publication, thinking about how you're going to design and set out your content,
being able to see what the finished product is going to look like is key. And this really
warmed my heart that Finn took this step to do this, because it's something I wanted to do,
but I didn't have the kind of know-how to do it. I knew we needed a template of some sort,
but I didn't know how to build it. So Finn stepped up and helped us to create it. So that's,
I think, showing the strength of the community. So these are just a sample of the people that
have contributed to the site so far. These are only the contributors who have GitHub accounts.
There are people that are kind of contributing through different avenues. But now we're starting
to see not just people creating content, but people like Finn and Zoe, who I've highlighted,
who are helping us sort of work through the science bugs and all that sort of stuff.
I feel like I'm learning a lot from working with this community. And it's been really beneficial.
One of the things that I pointed out when I first went to the Quarto site was that there's this live
rendering of figures from the document. Well, we quickly figured out with some work that this was
going to kill our website rendering speed, so we couldn't use that. So the community helped us to
figure out a way around that, where we could still output the figures, but drop them into the
article as image files instead. Code annotation. This is a cool new feature that's in Quarto.
Clearly, I wasn't reading the updates diligently enough, because Finn had to point this out to me
that this was a thing, right, that you could build. And it's a really interactive, tactile way
for people to kind of understand what's going on in your code. And I also learned that designing
for HTML was a lot harder than it first appeared. We got a design company to kind of come up with
the brand and the look of the website for us, but they literally just dropped a load of
in-design documents off and said, you go and implement that now. So I had to figure out CSS
pretty quickly. And I did that by, again, going to look at other people's websites, seeing what
they've done, and then trying to adapt it for our own purposes. And because I feel like I've learned
so much from the community, I'm also trying to sort of give back and share what I've learned,
as basic as it might be. So I've been working for a while now with the American Statistical
Association's Justice, Equity, Diversity, and Inclusion group to help support and build their
website. And that's been really a really good experience. I've been really pleased to be
involved in that. And recently, another project came up at the Royal Statistical Society to develop
some guidance on data visualization. We were thinking of it as like a kind of notes for
contributors for our publications, but following the experience that we had with real-world data
science and building that, we decided that actually we were going to take a different approach to it.
So now, like real-world data science, it's a living document, essentially. It's built in
Quarto. It has a GitHub repo behind it. All the source files are on there. And we're encouraging
people to contribute and develop that. Because data visualization changes all the time. Standards
and best practices evolve. And we want this document to be a document that evolves.
So this is where I am today. I rather, I guess, bullishly described my talk as from journalist
to coder. I don't think I should say I'm a coder. I've done some coding. But I wish I'd learned
coding at school. I think my career might have gone in a bit of a different direction. I really
do enjoy the technical side of the job and spend far too much time on it. Fortunately, my boss isn't
to hear that. But for people like me, for journalists and others who don't have a
coding background, the message I wanted to get across really is that if I can learn it through
Quarto experimenting with this platform, anyone can really. And also, the discovery about open
source collaborative publication has been a really good one for me. Because I, again,
am a journalist, old media by training. You're kind of taught to, you know, it'd be quite
insular. You only work in small teams or individually. You keep things under wraps.
You don't share it with people until you're ready to publish because you don't want anyone
to gazump you and steal your story before you publish it. But actually, I think there's a lot
of benefit and advantage for being public and open about what it is that you're doing
and inviting people in to contribute to that. And so this is where we are today as a website. So we
went from this to this. And please do check out the site and see how it's changed. This was where
it was last week. We published 50 articles so far. We've got the 19 GitHub contributors and many more
to come, hopefully. 12,000 users and 40,000 views since we launched. So March 2022, build us a
website. That's what my boss said to me. And I can now say I built a website. And I'm very pleased
about that. But I think it'd probably be more accurate to say that we, as in the community of
people behind real world data science, are building a website. And it continues to develop. And if I
had to leave you with a short phrase of my own to think about, it would be, why not join us?
So thank you very much. Here are our details. Thanks for listening.
Thank you so much. Thank you.
We do have some questions on Slido. If you want to put your own there, please do. The keyword is
GrandHallIJ. Is that correct?
So the first one is, Brian, what is your solution for hosting and deploying your quarter website?
Hosting and?
Deploying.
Oh, so we use GitHub Pages, basically. That's how we use it. I know that there's a danger that the
bigger the site gets, because there starts being caps on the amount of traffic you can have going
to the site. But we'll cross that bridge when we come to it.
We're in very familiar territory for us here with GitHub Pages.
Could the website template be used for offline deliverables as well,
so that the brand matches between the two?
Yeah, yeah, you can do that. So it can render out to, I guess,
oh no, it actually won't. No, it won't. The styling won't carry across. It'll just be in
HTML, the styling. But you can. You can use the template to output to Word docs, but it won't,
the theme and stuff like that won't carry across.
We should make that happen.
Sorry?
Well, it would be quite nice to do that, yeah. But I was inspired by Mine's talk about all the
things that you can do in terms of journal templates and things like that. So yeah,
I have to look into that and research it in more depth.
Okay. What else? Oh, what is your next quarto project going to be?
My next quarto project? Well, I am slowly building my own personal website,
but that was really, I only kind of set that up as a place where I could
break things without worrying about the actual website falling over. But at some point,
I would like to finish that and maybe start like blogging and doing things,
writing about my interests, like video games and movies and stuff like that.
So basically you got hooked. Everybody gets a website for Christmas.
Yeah, I think as I say, I've kind of become a bit of an advocate for it now. And I think any
project that we're going to do in the Royal Statistical Society that involves an online
publication at some point, I think we're going to make sure it's rooted in quarto and in that kind
of open source collaborative space. A lot of things can change in 200 years.
The Royal Statistical Society is present time. What else? Oh, yes. How are you handling multiple
contributors? Meaning do you have different rights levels or permission levels for your contributors?
So at the moment, we don't have multiple people contributing directly to the GitHub repo.
So what it tends to work is that people might build an article in their own
repository and then they'll share the files with us. Over time, yeah, we would look to do that as
people become more familiar with it. But actually it's most of the people we've worked with so far
haven't kind of gone all in using GitHub in the way we would like them to, as in being the source
of creating the files, submitting the article, editing, reviewing and all that sort of stuff.
But that's kind of where we want to get to. That's our vision anyway.
Okay. The next one is sort of like, but really type question. How long did it take you to get
the first version online? And I'm going to add to this question, how long did it take you for your
personal homepage? One for like the real data science homepage and the other one for your
personal one. Like try one and try two. Oh, okay. It took quite a long time
getting it up and running, I have to say. I don't know. I didn't keep count, but I think my
email inbox, there's a folder somewhere of all the failed runs of the GitHub Action.
And I was wondering, why is it not displaying yet? And then I went in there and it was like,
I don't know, a hundred failed attempts. So yeah, it was pretty sad. And I still have
problems with GitHub Actions now. We're trying to figure out on this data visualization guidance
site, somewhere where there's a thing we want to do with it, but we just can't get the GitHub
Actions to work. And there are people more knowledgeable than me who can't figure it out.
This is your call to action for the community. Help him troubleshoot the GitHub Actions.
Especially since you did not go into the action and tell me, yeah, second try was totally easy.
But yes, please help him troubleshoot his GitHub Actions. We all need that help from time to time.
Thank you so much for the great presentation. Thanks for listening.